feat(ai-gateway): Add MCP series how-to (#6439)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_how-tos/ai-gateway/monitor-mcp-traffic-with-otel.md

description: Attach an OpenTelemetry Policy to an MCP Server entity to export OTLP metrics for MCP tool traffic to a collector.

products:
  - ai-gateway

series:
  id: mcp-conversion-2-0
  position: 2

permalink: /ai-gateway/monitor-mcp-traffic-with-otel/

works_on:
  - konnect

min_version:
  ai-gateway: '2.0'

entities:
  - ai-mcp-server
  - ai-policy

tags:
  - ai
  - mcp
  - observability

tldr:
  q: How do I monitor MCP tool traffic in {{site.ai_gateway}}?
  a: |
    Attach an [OpenTelemetry Policy](/ai-gateway/policies/opentelemetry/) to an [AI MCP Server](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/) entity, and {{site.ai_gateway}} automatically sends metrics like tool call counts, response sizes, and request durations to your observability backend, no code changes required.

    This tutorial shows you how to attach the Policy using kongctl, generate some MCP traffic, and see the resulting metrics in a local OpenTelemetry Collector.

tools:
  - kongctl

prereqs:
  inline:
    - title: OpenTelemetry Collector
      content: |
        Launch a local OpenTelemetry Collector that listens on port 4318 and writes received data to a text file:

        ```sh
        docker run \

>           --name otel-collector \

Reviewer: consider running this in the background instead of piping to stdout since we explicitly check the collector-output.txt file anyway. Having this and the MCP server running in the foreground results in a messy environment to manage and increases the chance a user kills one by mistake

Author: I'll fix this, good point

Author: It's fixed now

          -p 127.0.0.1:4318:4318 \
          otel/opentelemetry-collector:0.141.0 \
          2>&1 | tee collector-output.txt
        ```

        In a new terminal, keep the container running so it can receive metrics from {{site.ai_gateway}}.
      icon_url: /assets/icons/opentelemetry.svg

cleanup:
  inline:
    - title: Stop the OpenTelemetry Collector
      content: |
        ```sh
        docker rm -f otel-collector
        ```
    - title: Clean up {{site.ai_gateway}} resources
      include_content: cleanup/products/ai-gateway

---
## Attach an OpenTelemetry Policy to the MCP Server entity

> By default, an AI Policy applies to every resource on your {{site.ai_gateway}}. Setting `global` to `false` changes that: the `otel-mcp` Policy now only takes effect on entities that explicitly list it, instead of applying gateway-wide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, an AI Policy applies to every resource on your {{site.ai_gateway}}. Setting `global` to `false` changes that: the `otel-mcp` Policy now only takes effect on entities that explicitly list it, instead of applying to all entities.
```

> The `marketplace-mcp` entity does exactly that by referencing `otel-mcp` in its `policies` list. As a result, every request that goes through `marketplace-mcp` is measured and exported as metrics to the collector you started earlier. The `service.name` value under `resource_attributes` is just a label attached to that exported data, so if you're running multiple {{site.ai_gateway}}s or services into the same collector, you can tell which one a given metric came from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `marketplace-mcp` entity does this by referencing `otel-mcp` in its `policies` list. As a result, every request that goes through `marketplace-mcp` is measured and exported as metrics to the collector you started earlier. The `service.name` value under `resource_attributes` is a label attached to that exported data, so if you're running multiple {{site.ai_gateway}}s or services into the same collector, you can tell which one a given metric came from.
```

simplify

    type: conversion-listener
    enabled: true
    policies:
      - !ref otel-mcp#name
    access:
      acl_attribute_type: consumer
      acls:
        allow: []
      default_tool_acls:
        deny: []
    config:
      url: http://host.docker.internal:3000
      route:
        paths:
          - /marketplace
      logging:
        payloads: true
        statistics: true
      server:
        timeout: 60000
    tools:
      - name: get-users
        description: Get users
        method: GET
        path: /marketplace/users
        parameters:
          - name: id
            in: query
            required: false
            schema:
              type: string
            description: Optional user ID
      - name: get-orders-for-user
        description: Get orders for a user
        method: GET
        path: /marketplace/orders
        parameters:
          - description: User ID to filter orders
            in: query
            name: userid
            required: true
            schema:
              type: string
EOF
```
{:.collapsible}

## Generate MCP traffic

Using the `marketplace-mcp` connection you already set up in ChatWise:

1. Start a new chat.

> 1. Click the **hammer icon** to enable MCP tools, and enable `marketplace-mcp` from the dropdown.

Reviewer: add reminder about tool approval

Author: added
